This directory contains the following files:
   README:
      This file, which contains the modifications necessary for the
      basic KIP / Kinetics package.
      
   gw.c:
      The modified version of gw.c.  The modification allows IP broadcasts
      on the "real" ethernet to get onto the Appletalk Net.  The software
      already allowed IP broadcasts out.  This change allows the Xinu
      "ruptime" command to print information collected from rwho
      broadcast packets.  A flag has been allocated from one of the
      old, now unused, subnet mask fields.  When 1, broadcasts can get
      in, when 0, they cannot.  The standard KIP software will work fine
      with the Xinu code if preferred.  The altered code is
      substituted by defining the cpp symbol PURDUE.
      
   atalkatab:
      The file which is downloaded from the Unix host to the Kinetics host
      at reboot time.  This file is in standard form, except that
      the field noted above, (and commented in the file), is now used to
      control broadcasts.
	       
   atalk.local:
      Used by the atalkad program.  This is our version.
   
   gw.srec.broadcast:
      The s-record file that is downloaded into the Mac.  This is the
      compiled version of the 2/87 KIP code, with the modified gw.c file
      from above, in the format necessary to download using the Kinetics
      Prompt program.

   config:
      This is the companion file to gw.srec above.  It sets some of the
      Kinetics parameters, with most of them now being set by the
      Unix host running atalkad and the file atalkatab.

   src:
      The public domain distribution of the KIP source code, with the
      modification made to gw.c as described above.  The compiled
      program, gw.srec, is the same as the version, gw.srec.broadcast,
      in the main directory.

When making changes to the code, it might be helpful to keep in mind the
following information about OUR setup upon which the files are built.
You will have to substitute local information about your site in place
of these names and addresses.

    1) Our local ethernet, 128.10.2.0, is a class B network, in that
       the first 2 bytes give the network number, and the last 2 give the
       host number, (even though all hosts on the present network
       start with 2).
    2) Our Kinetics box is named Brastius, and is IP address 128.10.2.90
    3) We have 10 Macintoshes allocated in the IP map from
       128.10.2.91 to 128.10.2.100, 5 are static, and 5 are dynamic.
    4) Our Unix server running atalkad is named Gwen, and is IP
       address 128.10.2.8.
    5) Our name server is IP address 128.10.2.5.
